This is the source to Larry Wall's "patch" program ported to the 
Minix operating system.  I've used this program for several months,
and it seems to work quite well.  It certainly is more reliable and
forgiving than "fix."  That program can't reconcile diffs with
altered source;  this one can.

There are a number of problems with the "virgin" Un*x source under
Minix.  The first is the absence of both "sed" and a full
implementation of "expr" from off-the-shelf Minix
1.2.  This means that "Configure" can't run to completion under Minix.
I've pre-run Configure and enclosed the results, so this won't
be a problem.  All you have to do is type "make."

Another problem arises from patch's use of long integers as indices
into character arrays.  The Minix C compiler "knows" that it has at
most 64K worth of memory to play with, so it prints messages about
conversions from long to pointer losing accuracy.  At *lot* of
messages.  Don't worry.  I've been using the program for a couple of
months and it does work in spite of the nasty compilation warnings.
I've tracked down the problem to one line in common.h:

	typedef long LINENUM;

Don't bother trying to change long to int;  I've tried that.  The
warnings disappear, but the program malfunctions.  I'll take
compilation warnings over incorrect operation any day.

Patch occasionally uses "ed" to process diffs that look like editor
scripts.  Someone (Brian Beatie, I think) posted an ed a while ago
and the sources should be in the achives.  I've assumed that ed lives in
/usr/bin.

A final note to the "small is beautiful" fans:  yes, I know that patch is
quite large.  It is not used constantly, and it eliminates a lot of
frustration.  It's memory well spent.

A final plea:  I've tried contacting Larry Wall, but to no avail.  I'd
like to see "official" support for Minix patch.  For one thing, it
would assure that Minix users would always have the latest version.
Does anyone know his current e-mail address?

Enjoy!

				Frank Wortner
				Morgan Stanley & Co.
				(212) 703-6498

				frank@morgan.com
				...{sun, uunet}!mstan!frank
