Here are some notes on the implementation of the PC-Minix floating
point routines, and a (rather extensive) list of bibliographical
references on floating point arithmetic.

1. IMPLEMENTATION

1.1 A Brief Overview of Floating-Point Math

Several of the references have better explanations of what floating
point numbers are and how arithmetic works on them.  The Sterbenz book
gives a fairly rigorous mathematical treatment; the first of the
Plaugher references provides an excellent in-depth explanation from the
user's point of view.  Briefly, my attempt:

Most of the computations done by computers are done on integers.  These
are simply represented - each bit of a binary quantity is used to
represent a power of two.  The least significant bit represents the
number 1; the next, the number 2; and so on.

Floating-point numbers are often referred to as "reals".  This is a
misnomer; the number of distinct values that a 32-bit floating-point
number can take on is the same as, or even less than, the number of
distinct 32-bit integers.  However, floats can represent a much larger
range of values.  As an example, 32-bit binary integers can range from
-2^31 to 2^31. A common format for 32-bit floats can have magnitudes from
2^-127 to 2^128.

This is accomplished by splitting up the bits of the binary quantity
into three fields: a sign, a biased exponent, and a significand
(commonly called the mantissa).  The significand represents a number
between zero and one, and is usually normalized so that it ranges from
1/2 to one.  The number represented is then:
	(sign) mantissa * 2^exponent

The exponent is stored in the bit field with a bias added.  The bias is
greater than or equal to the minimum actual exponent, so that the
biased exponent is always an unsigned quantity, and no exponent sign
bit is required.

Zero is usually represented by a zero biased exponent and a zero
mantissa.  This allows a floating point zero to be represented by an
"all-zeroes" binary number.

1.2 IEEE Standard Number Representation

The IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) Standards
Committee has defined a standard behaviour for floating point
arithmetic implementations.  This standard, IEEE 754-1985, defines the
formats, operations, conversions, and exceptions supported by a
conforming implementation.  Four formats are defined: single precision,
single extended, double precision, and double extended.  Field widths
and interpretations are defined for the non-extended formats as follows:

			Single		Double
Mantissa bits		24		53
Exponent max		+127		+1023
Exponent min		-126		-1022
Exponent width		+127		+1023
Exponent width in bits	8		11
Format width in bits	32		64

(The IEEE standard numbers the bias and exponent differently from a lot
of other floating point literature, including the ANSI float.h and the
source code of this package.)

In addition, representations are defined for positive and negative
infinity.  There are also quantities called NaN's, for Not a Number.
These result from illegal operations, and can either cause an exception
or propagate as operations are performed on them.

The standard defines several arithmetic operations: add, subtract,
multiply, divide, remainder, square root, and format conversion.  The
behaviour of each these operations when given a number, infinity, or
NaN is detailed.  Rounding modes and exceptions are also defined.
Numbers can gracefully underflow as "denormalized" numbers with a zero
biased-exponent.

Many of these features are nontrivial or slow to implement in software.
For this reason, this implementation does not strictly conform to the
standard.  The number of bits for single and double precision, the
bitfield layout, and the exponent bias are the same.  However,
infinities, NaN's, and denormalized numbers are not recognized.  There
is only one rounding mode, round-to-nearest with round-to-even in the
tie case.

(A newer standard, IEEE 854-1987, is similar to 754-1985 but is more
general.  For example, numbers may be represented either in binary or
decimal, and the formats are not specified exactly.)

1.3 Floating-Point Math in C

The C language defines three floating point sizes: float, double, and
long double.  (long double is new with the draft ANSI C standard, and
is not available in the Minix C compilers.) The standard states that
precision(float) <= precision(double) <= precision(long double), but
that they may have the same representation. 

The primary floating point datatype in C is double.  In K&R C
(including the Minix compiler), all floating point quantities are
extended to double before doing arithmetic on them.  This is part of
the "usual arithmetic conversions." (ANSI Standard C will relax this,
so that expressions containing strictly floats may be done using
float-arithmetic, provided the result is the same "as if" doubles had
been used.) Floating point arguments to functions are also widened to
double, except in Standard C when an in-scope prototype says that the
function takes a float argument.  All of the standard library functions
return doubles.

1.4 The ACK routines

The Minix C (and Pascal) compilers are based on the Amsterdam Compiler
Kit, or ACK.  The compiler generates 8086/8088 assembly code files from
C program text using several passes (each found in /lib or /usr/lib) as
follows:

 file.c       <file.i>       file.k        file.m      
--------> cpp --------> cem --------> opt --------> cg --------> file.s

(The "-v" option of the "cc" command allows the invocation of each of
these passes to be seen.)

The "cpp" program is a version of the usual C macro preprocessor, which
does "#-command" processing and macro substitution on the C source
code.

The ACK compiler "frontends" take as input a program in the source
language (in the case of "cem", C) and generate EM machine code.  The
EM ("Encoding Machine") machine (which does not exist in hardware, but
was defined as a generic machine for the ACK system to generate code
for) is a byte-addressable, stack-oriented processor.  It supports
operations on integers (signed and unsigned), pointers, sets, and
floating-point numbers.  Each data type is available in one or more
sizes, which are identified by their lengths in bytes.  The
architecture was designed based on research on instructions used by
block-structured high-level languages.

The output of "cem" is in EM compact assembly format.  This is EM
assembly-language represented in a compact byte-code representation.
The definition of this format, as well as the format of the ASCII
assembly language and the object code format, is described in a
document included with the ACK system.  An excerpt of this document was
posted to comp.os.minix as articles <1650@ast.cs.vu.nl> and
<1651@ast.cs.vu.nl>.

The "opt" program takes the "cem" output and performs some
machine-independent peephole optimizations on the EM code.  There are
as many as 400 EM instruction sequences which the optimizer can
transform into more efficient ones.  This take the pressure of
generating optimal code off of the frontend and reduces code
duplication between frontends.

The ACK system also includes a global optimizer, which is capable of
many more powerful optimizations.  This program is, however, too big to
run under Minix and is not included or available.

The code generator, "cg", reads the output of "opt" and translates the
EM assembly into code for the target machine.  For Minix-PC, this is
8086 assembly language in the Minix compressed-assembly format.  Most
EM instructions translate into a small number of 8086 instructions.
However, there are several which would translate to a larger number,
perhaps six or more.  These are broken out into subroutines.

These auxiliary subroutines are found "near the end" of the C library,
and do such things as implement switch-statement jumptables, convert
between various sizes of integers, do 32-bit arithmetic, and so on.

One of the files in this set of auxiliary routines is called "fakfp.s,"
for "fake floating point." The "cg" program is capable of generating
calls to a set of auxiliary routines which implement floating-point
arithmetic, but no real routines are included.  Instead, fakfp.s
includes a stub-routine which generates an EM "Illegal EM instruction"
trap and aborts the program.

This package includes many of the omitted routines.  There are stubs in
fakfp.s for the following:

.mlf	.mlf4	.mlf8		multiply
.dvf	.dvf4	.dvf8		divide
.ngf	.ngf4	.ngf8		negate
.adf	.adf4	.adf8		add
.sbf	.sbf4	.sbf8		subtract
.cmf	.cmf4	.cmf8		compare
.zrf	.zrf4	.zrf8		zero
.fif	.fif4	.fif8		split into exponent and fraction part
.fef	.fef4	.fef8		multiply and split integer and fraction part
.cif				convert integer to float
.cfi				convert float to integer
.cuf				convert unsigned to float
.cfu				convert float to unsigned
.cff				convert float to float (float <==> double)

Because of the "usual conversions" rules for expressions in pre-ANSI C,
all arithmetic is done in "double" floating point, even when all of the
elements are of type "float".  This makes it unnecessary to include
most of the auxiliary routines for doing arithmetic on float-sized
quantities. (The exceptions to this are the conversion routines, which
convert between all different sizes of floating point and integer numbers.)
The "C" compiler does not generate FEF or FIF instructions either, so
these are also not implemented.

1.5 Implementation notes on the ACK routines

All of the routines named above expect their arguments on the stack,
and return their results there. This, and the use of the normalization
subroutines, determine most of the structure of the routines.

Most of the floating point ACK-auxiliary routines call .norm8 or .norm4,
which take a denormalized mantissa, an exponent, and a sign, and pack
them into a standard-format normalized number.  (Note that these are
not actually EM instructions.)

When calling .norm8 (.norm4), there should be a 64-bit (32-bit)
mantissa on the stack. The radix point is assumed to be in front of
bit 52 (bit 23). The bx register should contain a properly biased
exponent. The high bit of dh is 1 for negative numbers and 0 for
positive numbers. The dl register should contain eight bits of information
to be used for rounding.

Most of the work of normalization involves shifting the mantissa up or
down until there is a 1-bit in the position where the implied 1-bit
would be, and packing the exponent and sign into the number.  When bits
are lost (by shifting off of the lower end), it is necessary to round
the number to minimize the error introduced. (Simply truncating those
bits which are lost, known as "chopping", has a high average error and
a high error bias.) Round-to-nearest is used, and tie cases round to
even (lowest bit is jammed to zero). When 1-bits are shifted out of the
eight-bit rounding register, its least significant bit "sticks" to 1,
to allow those bits to participate in the rounding process. (Only three
bits, usually one each of "guard," "round," and "sticky," are necessary
for this type of rounding. However, coding for a three-bit register
would be larger and slower when there are already instructions for
manipulating eight-bit registers.) Overflows cause EM traps, and
underflows return a zero.

The .zrf4 and .zrf8 routines simply push a zero of the appropriate
size.  The .ngf8 routine flips the sign bit of its argument.

Most of the rest of the routines have a couple of code segments in
common which set the si and/or di registers to point to the
arguments or result, and which unpack a number into its
sign/exponent/mantissa components.

The addition and subtraction routines, .adf8 and .sbf8, are the most
difficult.  The algorithm used is described in pseudocode in Rick
Grehan's "Floating Point without a Coprocessor" (see the references).
Basically the scheme is to line up the radix points of the two numbers
and add or subtract them depending on their relative magnitudes.  Most
of the problems are caused by the scarcity and small size of the
registers in the 8086.

Multiplication (mlf8.x) consists, basically, of adding the exponents
(being careful with the bias), exclusive-or-ing the signs, and
multiplying the mantissas.  In order to take advantage of the 8086 MUL
instruction, Algorithm M from section 4.3.1 of Knuth's Seminumerical
Algorithms (again, see the references) is used.  The loop is unrolled
and some special cases are commented out or otherwise avoided.  (No
doubt a faster multiply would have been possible using the algorithms
in section 4.3.3, but that would have required much more study than I
was willing to do, as well as requiring anyone else who maintained the
code to understand it.  The method used is reasonably fast and
reasonably straightforward.) A 106-bit mantissa is generated; the most
significant of these are used for the answer and the rest are packed
into a rounding byte.

Division (dvf8.x) is like multiplication except that the exponents are
subtracted and the mantissas are divided.  Again, see the Grehan
article for the pseudocode.  Division by zero causes an EM trap.

The convert-float-to-float instructions (cff.x) convert either an
eight-byte float into a four-byte float, or vice versa.  This basically
involves unpacking the number, realigning the mantissas, and adjusting
the bias.  The normalization routines are used to re-pack the result.

Converting a floating point number into an integer (cfi.x) or an
unsigned integer (cfu.x) involves realigning the mantissa until
the radix point is at a known point, and taking everything before
that point as the integer.

The inverse operations, in cif.x and cfi.x, are implemented by placing
the integers into a mantissa field, placing the radix point at the
end, and normalizing.

The floating-point comparison routine, in cmf8.x, uses a quick
algorithm outlined by Plaugher in the "Safe Math" article.  It takes
advantage of the way floating point numbers are packed into memory, in
that larger floating point numbers, when taken as integers, compare as
greater than smaller ones.  The main point of difficulty is that
floating point numbers use sign-magnitude representation, so they must
be converted to pseudo-2's-complement before the comparison.  The
return value is a 16-bit integer on the stack.  If it is less than
zero, the first argument was less than the second; if zero, they
compared equal; if greater than zero, the first was greater than the
second.

When an EM instruction is supposed to indicate failure, the auxiliary
routine will usually call the EM trap routines.  A "trp.x" file is
already included with the library, but the one presented here provides
messages for more trap codes. All of the codes are defined in the EM
definition documents.

(In general, in all of these routines, watch out for the bits whizzing
this way and that.  Be especially careful of the ones that fall off of
the ends.)

1.6 Assorted other library routines and their implementation

The above routines are all called implicitly by C code.  Most C
libraries also provide several explicitly-callable subroutines that do
floating-point math.

The ldexp() and frexp() routines are implemented in assembly code.
frexp() is basically a frontend for the number-unpacking routines,
and ldexp() is a frontend for the normalization routine's repacking
function. The ldexp() function is careful to keep the exponent within
the legal range, and returns HUGE_VAL (defined in <math.h>) of the proper
sign when it is not.

The modf() function is also written in assembly.  It unpacks an
arbitrary floating-point number into two floating-point point components,
an integer and a fractional part. Numbers which are large enough or small
enough to be entirely one or the other are special cases. Otherwise,
the number is shifted until the radix point lines up with the end of
the integer part, the result is split into two parts and each half is
renormalized.

The Standard C routines used to convert human-readable forms of
floating point numbers into their internal representations are atof()
and strtod().  They are mostly the same, except that strtod() can store
a pointer to the end of the number being converted.  Therefore, atof()
is defined in terms of strtod().

Part of strtod() is in C, although the entire subroutine was translated
from VAX/11 assembly (the freely-redistributable 4.3BSD-Tahoe version
of atof(), which is not included here).  The C portion uses _mul10add()
(written in assembly, and included in strtod_aux.x) to accumulate
digits in a 64-bit accumulator until it overflows.  Then the optional
exponent is parsed, the base-10 exponent is computed, and _adjust()
(also in strtod_aux.x) is called to multiply the 64-bit integer by
10^decexp, and pack the result into a double-format floating point
number.  All sorts of clever tricks are used in _adjust() to maximize
speed and precision; credit for these goes to the author of atof.s.

Standard C defines vfprintf() as a for producing formatted output from
a variable-length vector of arguments. The version included here is
a very slight modification of 4.3BSD-Tahoe's _doprnt() code (which
is freely redistributable.) vfprintf.c should be compiled with
the "-DFLOATLIB" flag if the floating-point conversion options
are to be included.

All of the other members of the "printf() family" are defined in terms
of vfprintf().  To my knowledge, all of these (along with the other
math.h functions provided) conform to the relevant portions of the
draft proposed ANSI C standard.

Preliminary versions of several functions traditionally provided in
"libm" are also included.  A few of them are not especially accurate,
perhaps to only about 40 bits.  They were written in haste and
ignorance, and will be replaced with provably better routines at the
earliest opportunity.

ceil() and floor() truncate numbers to integral floating-point
numbers in different ways. They use modf() to split up the
integer and fraction parts of their arguments.

_poly() and _mult() are internal routines, and are not meant to be
called by user-level programs.  The names are inspired by the Plaugher
"Safe Math" article.  _poly() evaluates a polynomial function with
given coefficients at a given value.  No overflow checking is done, so
the value should be "reduced".  _mult() multiplies two numbers and
returns HUGE_VAL (from <math.h>) with errno properly set if the result
is out of range, or the result otherwise.

log() returns the natural logarithm of its argument. The series expansion
used was found in A Survey of Numerical Mathematics, and the constants
are from the BSD 4.3-Tahoe libm source. log10() is trivially defined
using log().

exp() uses the argument reduction described in the previous reference.
The constants, except for the polynomial coefficient vector, come from
the libm source.

pow() uses log() and exp(), with a bit of code to handle special cases.

sqrt() was inspired quite directly by the Plaugher article "Do-it-yourself
Math Functions". The linear-approximation constants are a least-squares
estimator for the square root over [.5,1).

1.7 The EM-file postprocessor

For portability and machine-independence, the "cem" compiler frontend
outputs floating-point constants in human-readable ASCII notation
exactly as they were included in the original source program.  It is
intended that the code generator handle the machine-dependent
conversion to binary representation.  However, the "cg" program
distributed with Minix-PC is not able to do this conversion, and simply
treats all float constants as 0.0. (The 1.2-1.3 generator prints a
warning, "Warning: dummy floating point constant(s)".) Someone
with the source to "cg" could add this capability, but this option
is not available to everyone (myself included).

To solve this problem, it is necessary to introduce another pass into
the C compilation process.  The "fpp" postprocessor takes the
EM-assembly output of the "opt" program, and copies it to the output.
However, floating point constants are intercepted and converted to
binary format using atof().  The result is split up and output as
either two or four 16-bit integer constants.

The result is that the "cg" program never sees floating point constant
arguments. The conversion and copy is very fast, but since it is not
always necessary, the "fpp" pass is only run when the "-f" option is
given to the C compiler driver.

The EM format documentation mentioned above is, unfortunately, required
to understand the logic of the fpp.c program. (I have also written a
program to convert compact EM-assembly into a sort of human-readable
EM-assembly (though not identical to the format used in the ACK because
I have not seen enough to get it right). If you would like a copy of this
program please write and ask.)

2. REFERENCES

1. ANSI/IEEE, IEEE Standard for Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic, ANSI/IEEE
Std. 754-1985. New York, N.Y.: The Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Inc., 1985.

2. ANSI/IEEE, IEEE Standard for Radix-Independent Floating-Point Arithmetic,
ANSI/IEEE Std. 854-1987. New York, N.Y.: The Institute of Eletrical and
Electronics Engineers, Inc., 1987.

3. Cody, William J., and William Waite. Software Manual for the
Elementary Functions, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1980.

4. Grehan, Rick. "Some Assembly Required: Floating-Point Without a
Coprocessor, Part 1," Byte 13(9): pp. 313-319, Sep. 1988.

5. Grehan, Rick. "Some Assembly Required: Floating-Point Without a
Coprocessor, Part 2," Byte 13(10): pp. 293-298, Oct. 1988.

6.  Hart, John F., E.W. Cheney, et al. Computer Approximations, New York:
Robert E. Krieger Publishing Company, 1978.

7. Kernighan, Brian W., Dennis M. Richie. The C Programming Language,
Second Edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1988.

7. Knuth, Donald E. The Art of Computer Programming, Second Ed., Vol. 2,
Chapter 4. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1981.

8. Motorola, Inc. MC68881/MC68882 Floating-Point Coprocessor User's Manual,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1987.

9. Ochs, Tom. "Theory and Practice," Computer Language, 6(3): pp. 67-81,
March 1989.

10. Plaugher, P.J. "Computer Arithmetic," Programming on Purpose, Computer
Language, 5(2): pp. 17-23, Feb. 1988.

11.  Plaugher, P.J. "Properties of Floating-point Arithmetic,"
Programming on Purpose, Computer Language, 5(3): pp. 17-22, Mar. 1988.

12. Plaugher, P.J. "Safe Math," Programming on Purpose, Computer
Language, 5(5): pp. 17-21, May 1988.

13. Plaugher, P.J. "Do-it-yourself Math Functions," Programming on Purpose,
Computer Language, 5(6): pp. 17-22, Jun. 1988.

14. Sterbenz, Pat. Floating Point Computation, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1972.

15. Tanenbaum, Andrew, et al. "A Practical Tool Kit for Making Portable
Compilers," Communications of the ACM 26(9): pp. 654-660, September 1983.

16. Wilson, Pete. "Floating-Point Survival Kit," Byte 13(3): pp. 217-226,
Mar. 1988.

17. Young, David M., Robert Todd Gregory. A Survey of Mumerical Mathematics,
Volume I, Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1972.
